An Aspiration Prayer
by Gyalsé Tokme Zangpo

lama dang könchok sum la chaktsal lo
Homage to the Guru and Three Jewels!

dak ni kyé shying kyewa tamché du
May I, in each and every one of my lives to come,
daljor milü rinchen tob gyur né
Gain a precious human form, free and well-favoured,
shenyen dampa nam dang jalwa dang
And thereafter may I encounter sublime spiritual guides
taktu dampé chö la chöpar shok
And continuously apply myself to the sacred Dharma.

sipé dé la namyang ma chak shing
May I never cling to the pleasures of ordinary existence,
nyangdé menpé ta la ang mashyenpar
Nor become attached to the extreme of an inferior nirvāṇa.
khanyam semchen kün gyi dön gyi chir
For the sake of all beings as numerous as space is vast,
lamé changchub drub la tsönpar shok
May I strive to accomplish unsurpassed awakening.

döndam tröpé ta dang dralwa dang
Having realized the ultimate beyond conceptual limitations
kündzob gyuma tabur tok gyur né
And the illusory nature of the relative,
kechik tsam yang yelwa mepar ni
May I never be distracted even for so much as an instant,
zab dön nyam su len la tsönpar shok
As I diligently strive to take this profound truth to heart.

tsé di nyi la ang mi gé kün pong shying
Even in this very life, may I reject all that is unwholesome
taktu gewé chö la rabtu tsön
And constantly strive to apply the virtuous Dharma.
dü nam taktu go sum chöpa nam
May all my actions of body, speech and mind
shyen la penpé döndu gyurwar shok
Always be devoted solely to others' wellbeing!

tsé dujé tongwar gyurpa na
When it's time to let go of this life,
nubchok dewachen gyi shyingkham su
May the force of my faith and aspiration
dé dang dünpé shuk kyi lek drö né
Carry me to the western paradise of Sukhāvatī,
öpakmé pé tukjé jedzin shok
There to be guided by Amitābha in his compassion.

The dharma-professing monk Tokmé wrote this prayer of aspiration for Pön Rinchen Zangpo at the
dharma-fortress of Ngulchu .

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2021.

Source: "smon lam" in mkhyen brtse'i dbang po, blo gter dbang po. sgrub thabs kun btus. BDRC
W23681. 14 vols. Kangra, H.P.: Indo-Tibetan Buddhist Literature Publisher, Dzongsar Inst.
for Advanced Studies, null. Vol. 14: 656

Version: 1.0-20211229