Commentary on the Seven Points of Mind Training

by Gyalse Tokme Zangpo

Homage to the great Compassionate One!

Pure in the three trainings and with mastery of twofold bodhicitta,You spread the sugata's teachings
throughout the ten directions,As the crowning ornament among all holders of the teachings—Incomparable
guru, at your feet I prostrate myself in homage!

The single path traversed by the buddhas of the three times and their heirs,A precious treasury
that is the source of all benefit and joy,I shall here set forth, in response to the repeated
requests of fortunate disciplesAnd in reliance upon the guru's speech.

Individuals who seek to attain unsurpassable, complete and perfect awakening must set their
minds upon enlightenment and then exert themselves in the cultivation of both relative and
ultimate bodhicitta. As Ārya Nāgārjuna said:

If we ourselves and all the worldWish for unsurpassed enlightenment,Its basis is bodhicitta,Stable
as the king of mountains,Compassion reaching out in all directions,And wisdom that
transcends duality.[1]

The great precious, single divine lord Atiśa received instructions on cultivating bodhicitta
from three main teachers: the guru Dharmarakṣita, who cut and gave away his own flesh, and
realized emptiness purely through cultivating love and compassion; the guru Maitrīyogi,
who was able to take others' sufferings directly upon himself; and the guru of Suvarnadvīpa.
Here, what follows is the tradition of the Suvarnadvīpa guru.

There are many different ways of presenting this instruction, but the tradition of Geshe Chekawa
follows seven points: 1) the preliminary teachings of the supporting instructions; 2)
the main practice of training in bodhicitta; 3) how to bring adversity onto the path to enlightenment;
4) how to apply the practice throughout one's whole life; 5) the measure of
mind training; 6) the commitments of mind training; and 7) the precepts of mind training.

1. The Preliminaries

The root text says:

First, train in the preliminaries.

This consists of three contemplations: i) on the difficulty of finding the freedoms and advantages;
ii) on death and impermanence; and iii) on the trials of saṃsāra.

i. The Freedoms and Advantages

For the first, we contemplate the following: to obtain this support for practising the Dharma,
a human body with its freedoms and advantages, we must have accumulated the cause, which
is abundant virtue. Among sentient beings, very few practice pure virtuous action, and this
means that the resultant freedoms and advantages are difficult to gain. If we consider
other beings, such as animals, we can appreciate just how rare it is to find the freedoms
and advantages. Therefore, now that we have found these freedoms and advantages, we must
not allow them to go to waste, but use them to practise the one pure Dharma.

ii. Death and Impermanence

Meditate on how life is uncertain and there are many circumstances which can lead to death,
so that we cannot be certain we will even survive the day. We must therefore put all our energy
into the sacred Dharma right away.

iii. The Trials of Saṃsāra

Consider how it is taught that virtuous and unwholesome actions result in pleasure and pain,
and how we must therefore avoid all unwholesome actions and practise virtue as much as possible.

2. The Main Practice

Training in bodhicitta has two parts: i) training in ultimate bodhicitta and ii) training in
relative bodhicitta.

i. Ultimate Bodhicitta

This consists of three sets of practices: the preparation, the main part and the conclusion.


As the preparation, take refuge and generate bodhicitta, then pray to the deity and the guru
and offer the seven branches. Sit up straight and breathe in and out twenty-one times, without
any confusion, omission or addition. This will help to make you a suitable vessel for
meditative concentration.

For the main part, the root text says:

Consider all dharmas as dreamlike.

As this indicates, the whole environment and the beings within it, which we perceive as objects,
are dreamlike. That is to say, they appear as they do because our own minds are deluded
and not as a result of even the slightest factor aside from mind. We must therefore put
a stop to our projections.

We might then wonder whether the mind itself is real, so the root text says:

Examine the nature of unborn awareness.

Mind itself is empty of the three stages of arising, remaining and ceasing. It has no colour,
no shape, and so on. It does not abide outside or within the body. It has no fixed character
at all and cannot therefore be apprehended in any way. Rest in an experience beyond thought.
As you do so, if any thought of an antidote—such as considering that body and mind
are empty—should arise, then as the root text says:

Let even the antidote be freed in its own place.

This means that we look into the essence of the antidote itself, and when we realize that it
has no true nature, we rest with that experience. As for how to rest, the root text says:

Rest in the ālaya, the essence of the path.

Avoiding all the projection and absorption associated with the other seven types of consciousness,
we must settle with lucid clarity in an experience that is beyond thought. We must
not mentally fixate in any way on what has no fixed character at all.

As regards the conclusion, the root text says:

Between sessions, be a conjurer of illusions.

In other words, we allow the experience of the meditation session to continue into the post-meditation.
We carry out all ordinary daily activities in the knowledge that whatever appears—ourselves
and others, the environment and beings—is just like an illusion and has no true
reality.

ii. Relative Bodhicitta

This has two parts: meditation and post-meditation. Regarding the meditation, the root text
says:

Train in the two—giving and taking—alternately.

This is extremely important. As Ācārya Śāntideva said:

Whoever wishes to afford protectionQuickly to both himself and othersShould practise that most
sacred mystery:The exhanging of oneself for others.[2]

And:

Unless I can give away my happinessIn exchange for others' suffering.I shall not attain the
awakening I seek,And even in saṃsāra I'll find no joy.[3]

And:

In order to allay harms done to me, therefore,And in order to pacify the sufferings of others,I
shall give myself up to othersAnd cherish them as I do myself.[4]

We begin by focusing clearly on our own mother from this life. From the time she carried us
inside her womb, she cared for us unfailingly, so that we could encounter the Buddha's teachings
and put them into practice. Her kindness is therefore exceedingly great. Not only in
this life, but throughout beginningless time in saṃsāra, she has looked upon us with eyes
of love, thought of us with affection, shielded us from harm, brought us benefit and ensured
our wellbeing. Thus, her kindness is very great indeed. Considering that the one who
did all this for us is now undergoing various miseries in saṃsāra, cultivate intense compassion.
Think: "Now I shall benefit her in return! I shall eliminate all that harms her!"

What is it that harms her? It is suffering and its origin. Suffering harms her directly, while
its origin harms her indirectly. So consider that you take both upon yourself. Take on
all the suffering and its origin that exists in her being so that it arises in your own heart.
Cultivate a strong wish for this to happen.

What is it that would benefit your mother? Happiness and virtue. So, without any selfish concerns,
give away all your own happiness and virtue to your mother. Consider that as a result
she immediately amasses all the favourable circumstances required for Dharma practice and
is capable of attaining awakening. Generate an intense longing for this to occur.

Meditate in the same way while considering your father and others, before ultimately extending
the practice to all sentient beings. After all, these sentient beings have been your mother
and father throughout the course of beginningless time. They have benefitted you immeasurably
and been incredibly kind. Yet all those who showed you such kindness are now being
tormented by various sufferings in saṃsāra. Meditate, therefore, on how wonderful it would
be if they could be freed from their misery. Take on and absorb all their suffering and
give them your own body, possessions and virtuous deeds of the past, present and future.
Consider that, as a result, they are happy and their virtue increases. Generate intense longing
that this may happen.

So that this mental exchange of self and other might arise more easily, the root text says:

These two are to be mounted on the breath.

As you breathe out, consider that all your own happiness and virtues goes to others. And as
you breathe in, consider that all their non-virtue and suffering comes to you.

Second, concerning the post-meditation, the root text says:

Three objects, three poisons and three sources of virtue.

On the basis of the three types of object—pleasant, unpleasant and neutral—we experience the
three emotions of attachment, aversion and dull indifference. There are many beings who experience
these three poisons based on the three types of object, so here we consider that
we take on all their three poisons. As a result, they gain the threefold virtue of being
without attachment, aversion and dull indifference.

The root text advises how to inspire mindfulness:

In all activities, train by applying slogans.

This means that we should recite, "May all the negative actions and suffering of beings ripen
on me! May all my happiness and virtue ripen on other beings!" And with this, we should
feel intense resolve. So that we might be able to take others' sufferings upon ourselves,
the root text says:

Begin the process of taking with yourself.

This means that by first taking on our own future suffering in the present, we will become capable
of taking on even the misery of others.

3. Transforming Adversity into the Path of Enlightenment

The root text says:

When all the world is filled with evil,Transform adversity into the path of enlightenment.

As a result of unwholesome actions, the environment's resources become depleted, beings become
unruly and so on. When many such forms of suffering arise, they can be transformed into
the path of enlightenment through both intention and action.

i. Intention

Intention itself has two aspects: transforming adversity into the path of enlightenment through
relative bodhicitta and through ultimate bodhicitta.

Transforming Adversity into the Path of Enlightenment through Relative Bodhicitta

In the past when we experienced suffering we did not recognize self-grasping as the enemy, and,
failing to recognize the great kindness of sentient beings, we blamed them. Now in order
to highlight the fact that all suffering is the fault of self-grasping, the root text says:

Drive all blames into one.

Whatever suffering we experience is the fault of our own grasping at a self; others are not
to blame:

If all the harm within the worldAnd all the fears and sufferingsDerive only from clinging to
a self,What need have I for such a demon?[5]

Throughout beginningless time we have clung to a self where there is none. And, in order to
care for this self, we have accumulated the karma of harming others and so on. This is how
the sufferings of saṃsāra, such as those of the lower realms, arise. Introduction to the
Bodhisattva's Way of Life says:

O mind, you have spent countless agesPursuing your own interests,And yet this great exertionHas
brought you only suffering.[6]

Since it is self-grasping that brings about suffering, we must view this self-grasping as the
enemy. The mind that clings to a self where there is none has engendered all the suffering
that we have experienced in saṃsāra throughout beginningless time until now. It is this
that causes all our attitudes of jealousy towards superiors, contempt towards inferiors and
rivalry towards equals. It is this that prevents us from becoming liberated from saṃsāra
and that brings about all the suffering of harm from human and non-human interaction. As
Introduction to the Bodhisattva's Way of Life says:

This is the one who, hundreds of timesIn cyclic existence, has done me harm.Now, remembering
these grievances,I shall crush your selfish attitude.[7]

Whenever self-grasping occurs, examination will show that there is no self at all. By questioning
why we cling to such a self, we can abandon self-grasping just as it arises. Strive
then to prevent this grasping of self-cherishing from occurring again in future. As Introduction
to the Bodhisattva's Way of Life says:

The time when you could harm meHas passed and is here no more.I see you now! Where will you
hide?I'll crush you in all your arrogance.[8]

Thus, since whatever harms we face are the fault of this demon of self-grasping, we must do
whatever we can to tame it. As Shawopa said: "Today, in this short life, subjugate this demon,
I beg you."

Someone whose intentions and actions are directed towards securing their own wellbeing warrants
the name of 'layperson'; while someone whose intentions and actions are directed towards
the benefit of others is worthy of the name of a Dharma practitioner. Let us therefore
avoid and adopt according to Geshe Ben's tradition. For it was Geshe Ben who said, "Now I
shall hold the spear of the antidote at the gateway of the mind. If it is vigilant, I shall
be vigilant too. If it is relaxed, I shall relax as well."

Viewing self-grasping as the enemy and avoiding it is what Shawopa called "the Dharma of exorcising
the demon."[9] So that we might regard self-grasping as the enemy and embrace the
cherishing of others instead, the root text says:

Meditate on the great kindness of all.

Generally speaking, all beings have been our kind parents in the course of beginningless time.
They were thus very kind to us in the past. In addition, the attainment of unsurpassable
enlightenment also depends on sentient beings. As Introduction to the Bodhisattva's Way
of Life says:

Given that a buddha's qualities are gainedIn dependence on ordinary beings and buddhas alike,What
sense is there in honouring only buddhasWhile not respecting these ordinary beings?[10]


For someone training to accomplish buddhahood, buddhas and sentient beings are equal in the
extent of their kindness. We must therefore cultivate intense love and compassion for sentient
beings; we must take on their negativity and suffering, and give them our happiness and
virtue. Should we encounter harmful people or non-human beings in particular, let us consider
how these harmdoers have been our mother repeatedly throughout beginningless time.
At those times, they did not shy away from unwholesome actions, suffering and gossip in order
to secure our wellbeing. This brought them various forms of suffering in saṃsāra. Now,
through the power of delusion, they do not recognize us, dear relatives from the past. Indeed,
inspired by our own bad karma, they commit the negative act of harming us, which will
only lead them to further suffering in the future. Consider, therefore, how they have long
endured suffering for our sake and how they will continue to do so in the future, and cultivate
intense compassion for them. Think: "In the past, I only did them harm. Now, I shall
dispel all their hurt and bring about their benefit!" And meditate intensively on tonglen—giving
and taking.

Do whatever you can to benefit visible beings, such as humans or dogs, directly. Even if you
cannot do this, at least make the wish that they might be free from suffering, gain happiness
and swiftly attain enlightenment. Make this heartfelt aspiration and even recite it aloud.
Generate the intention that whatever virtuous acts you perform from now on will be for
their sake.

If the harmdoer is a god or a spirit, think: Throughout beginningless time, I have consumed
your flesh and blood, so now in return I offer you my own flesh, blood and so on. Mentally
disect your body in the presence of the harmdoer and surrender it by thinking and even saying
aloud, "Eat my flesh and bones! Drink my blood!" Consider that the harmdoer's hunger
and thirst are pacified through the consumption of your flesh. Unadulterated bliss fills their
body and mind, and they master twofold bodhicitta. Imagine that you offer your body to
all the gods and spirits that consume flesh and blood in just the same way and that they
all become satisfied, happy and virtuous.

Thus, since all faults arise from self-cherishing, recognize it as the enemy. And since all
benefit and happiness comes from sentient beings, view them as close allies and do whatever
you can to help them. As Langri Thangpa said: "No matter which profound Dharma texts I consult,
I find the message is the same: all faults are one's own and all qualities belong
to brother and sister sentient beings. Given this crucial point, the only conclusion is that
we must give all profit and victory to others and take all loss and defeat upon ourselves."

Transforming Adversity into the Path of Enlightenment through Ultimate Bodhicitta

The root text says:

Meditating on delusory perceptions as the four kāyas.Is the unsurpassable śūnyatā protection.


Whenever we experience mental afflictions or suffering caused by harm from the outer environment
or beings within it, these afflictions and sufferings are delusory perceptions of our
own mind. They thus lack even the slightest true existence. Such relative appearances are
comparable to a dream in which we are burnt by fire or drowned in water. It would be an error
to mistake what is unreal for reality. All phenomena ultimately lack true reality, so
look into the essence of any mental affliction or experience of suffering. Since it does
not arise from anywhere in the beginning, it is the unborn dharmakāya. What is unarisen does
not cease, so it is the unceasing sambhogakāya. Since what neither arises nor ceases does
not remain in the interim, it is the non-abiding nirmāṇakāya. And since these are indivisible
in essence, it is the svabhāvikakāya. Viewing delusory perceptions as the four buddha-bodies
in this way is known as the instruction on recognizing the four kāyas.

Whatever harms us also proves to be very kind, since it inspires our training in the two types
of bodhicitta. The harmdoer highlights how we are without an antidote and how we fail to
notice the onset of the mental afflictions, so they are like an emanation of the teacher
or buddha. Should you undergo intense suffering as a result of a serious illness like leprosy,
think: "Were it not for this suffering I would be caught up in preparations for this
life. But this has caused me to remember the Dharma when I had failed to do so. It must therefore
be the activity of the guru and the Three Jewels."

In short, we must arrive at the heartfelf convision that just as bodhicitta arises in dependence
on the guru, twofold bodhicitta can also develop based on harmdoers and suffering, and
these are therefore equivalent.

ii. Action

The root text then refers to the special practice of accumulation and purification that transforms
adversity into the path:

The fourfold practice is the best of methods.

1. The Practice of Accumulating Merit

When suffering befalls you and you think how joyful you would be were the suffering to disappear,
contemplate the following: "Not wanting to suffer but wishing to be happy is a sign
that one must accumulate the causes of happiness." So we must make offerings to the guru and
Three Jewels, venerate the saṅgha and offer tormas to the elemental spirits. In short,
we must put our energy into gathering the accumulations physically, verbally and mentally.
We should take refuge, generate bodhicitta, make a maṇḍala offering to the guru and Three
Jewels and pray to them fervently, without any hope or fear, saying: "If it is better for
me to be sick, bless me with sickness. If it is better for me to be healed, bless me with
recovery. If it is better for me to die, bless me with death."

2. The Practice of Purifying Negative Actions

If we do not wish to suffer, this is a sign that we must abandon the cause of suffering, which
is negative actions. To feel regret for the harmful actions we have committed in the past
is the power of repentance; to vow never to repeat them even at the cost of one's life
is the power of restraint; to take refuge and generate bodhicitta is the power of support;
to meditate on emptiness, recite special dhāraṇīs and mantras and so on is the power of antidotal
action. Thus we should confess our misdeeds properly by means of these four powers.

3. The Practice of Offering to Harmful Influences

Offer tormas and make heartfelt prayers, saying, "Since you support my training in bodhicitta,
you are very kind. Please continue: cause all the suffering of sentient beings to ripen
on me!" If you are not able to do this, offer tormas, cultivate loving kindness and compassion,
and command them by saying, "Through whatever I do to assist you now and in the longer
term, do not obstruct my Dharma practice!"

4. The Practice of Offering to the Dharma Protectors

Offer tormas to the Dharma protectors and request them to pacify any circumstances that might
hinder Dharma practice and to create favourable circumstances instead.

In order to integrate one's immediate circumstances onto the path, one should do as the root
text says:

Whatever you encounter, apply the practice.

Should you experience intense suffering as a result of sudden illness, harmful influences, encountering
an enemy, or the like, consider how there are innumerable cases of such suffering
in the world and feel compassion for all those affected. Draw all this suffering into
your own or consider how this harm assists your training in bodhicitta. Reflect on how it
is comparable to the guru's kindness. Should you see someone in distress, immediately take
their suffering upon yourself. And whenever you or another experience a strong mental affliction
cultivate the heartfelt wish to take on the mental afflictions of others.

All these methods for bringing adversity onto the path put a stop to both hope and fear. Yet
even if we ultimately arrive at a path that is without hope and fear, to train with a view
of friends and enemies right now is like straightening a crooked tree, as Langri Thangpa
would say.

4. Applying the Practice throughout the Whole of Life

The root text says:

The essence of the instruction, briefly stated,is to apply yourself to the five strengths.

Five Strengths

The five strengths are as follows:

The strength of impetus is to create a powerful impetus in the mind, by thinking again and again,
"From now on, for this month, this year, throughout my life, and until I attain enlightenment,
I shall never part from the two kinds of bodhicitta!"The strength of familiarization
is to train repeatedly in the two types of bodhicitta.The strength of wholesome seeds
is to accumulate merit as much as possible so that bodhicitta may arise and increase.The
strength of revulsion is to reflect, whenever thoughts of self-cherishing occur, on how this
has been the cause of various sufferings throughout beginningless time and how even in
this life it is responsible for suffering, negative actions and Dharma's failure to develop
as one would wish. And with this, to cast away thoughts of self-cherishing.The strength
of aspiration is to make an aspiration after every virtuous deed, such as, "From now until
I attain enlightenment, may I never part from the training in twofold bodhicitta! May I
transform any adversity that arises and make it a support for this practice!" Make offerings
to the guru and Three Jewels and to the Dharma protectors. Offer torma and pray that this
may come to pass.

These five strengths are said to constitute a practice that brings everything together into
a single Hūṃ.

For the Moment of Death

One might wonder about the instructions for the moment of death according to this tradition,
so the root text says:

The mahāyāna advice for transferenceInvolves the same five strengths. Conduct is important.


When someone who practises this teaching contracts an illness that is certain to prove fatal,
the practice of wholesome seeds is to offer all one's possessions to the greatest possible
source of merit, such as the teacher or the Three Jewels. This should be done without any
clinging or attachment.

Then the strength of aspiration is to offer the seven branches to the guru and Three Jewels
and to make fervent prayers of aspiration such as, "Grant your blessings so that during the
bardo and in all my future lives, I may continue to train in twofold bodhicitta! Grant your
blessings so that I may encounter a guru who teaches this instruction!"

The strength of revulsion is to think: "Thoughts of self-cherishing have forced me to suffer
in the past and unless I can be free of them in the future they will continue to prevent
my happiness. Even though I have cherished this body of mine, still it suffers. If I examine,
there is nothing in either body or mind that is graspable as self." With this understanding,
one abandons self-grasping.

The strength of impetus is to cultivate the strong intention again and again that one will train
in twofold bodhicitta during the bardo.

Then the strength of familiarization is to recollect the ways one has trained in twofold bodhicitta
in the past.

The particular conduct is to lie on one's right side, with the right hand supporting the right
cheek. With the little finger of that hand, close the right nostril and breathe through
the left. Then, with love and compassion as a preliminary, train in giving and taking as
you breathe in and out. After this, consider that everything within saṃsāra and nirvāṇa including
birth and death is only a mental projection while mind itself is not truly existent
in any way. Then rest in this state of understanding, without clinging to anything at all.
Thus, one passes away while combining and meditating upon the two types of bodhicitta.
It is said that although there are a great many instructions for the moment of death, none
is more wonderful than this.

5. The Measure of Mind Training

The root text says:

All teachings share a single purpose.

The purpose of all the teachings of the greater and lesser vehicles is to tame self-grasping.
This means that Dharma practice is meaningless (no matter how much one does) unless it functions
as an antidote to self-grasping. If the Dharma does function as an antidote to self-grasping
that is a sign that mind training has developed in one's being. This is the real
indication of progress in the Dharma, so it is likened to the bar on the balancing scales
that weigh practitioners. The root text says:

Of the two witnesses, rely upon the principal one.

Others might say, "This brother is an example of the saying that one in whom the Dharma has
arisen is a fine practitioner." Not meeting others' disapproval is indeed a form of testimony,
but do not take it to be the most important. Ordinary people in this world cannot read
minds, so they might be satisfied with glimpsing a fraction of outer conduct. The principal
witness, therefore, is an unembarassed look at one's own mind. To examine oneself thoroughly
with an honest mind and have no cause to feel ashamed is a sign of having trained the
mind. So generate the antidotes and make an effort not to discredit yourself.

The root text says:

Always maintain only a joyful attitude.

Through the force of training the mind well, we can be confident that , we will be able to integrate
any adversity we might face into the path of mind training. This is measure of having
trained the mind. So whatever negative circumstances arise, cultivate joy. And train
yourself so that you have no hesitation in taking on the adversity of others as well.

The root text says:

If this can be done even when distracted, you are proficient.

A skilled rider will not fall from a horse even when distracted. Similarly, whenever adversity
arises, such as sudden harm from people, if we do not feel anger but transform the adversity
into a support for mind training, this is a measure of having trained the mind. Make
an effort, therefore, and train to reach this level.

These various measures of mastery are all signs of having trained the mind but this does not
imply that there is no need for further training. Continue to make an effort and train the
mind even after these signs arise.

6. The Commitments of Mind Training

The root text says:

Train constantly in three basic principles.

The three basic principles are 1) not to transgress the mind training commitments, 2) not to
be reckless, and 3) not to fall into partiality.

Avoid telling yourself that you are a practitioner of mind training who can ignore lesser precepts.
Instead, with the intention of training the mind, guard all the precepts you have
taken, from the vows of individual liberation through to the commitments of the Vajrayāna,
and do not allow them to decline.Avoid all forms of reckless behaviour intended to demonstrate
to others that you have no self-cherishing, such as chopping down powerful trees or
befriending lepers. Take care not to conflict with the example of the masters of the Kadam
tradition founded upon the teachings of Geshe Dromtönpa at Radreng Monastery.Avoid all forms
of partiality, such as tolerating abuse from human beings but not from non-human beings,
respecting the powerful while disrespecting the weak, and loving one's friends but hating
enemies. Instead apply the training universally.

The root text says:

Change your attitude, but remain natural.

Transform your attitude from one of self-cherishing to one of cherishing others, while ensuring
that your actions of body and speech are in harmony with those of our Dharma companions.
It is said that all mind training practices should involve "making great progress but with
few outward indications." Mature your mind, therefore, in a way that is imperceptible
to others.

Don’t speak of injured limbs.

Do not say unpleasant things about others, whether this is pointing out disabilities such as
blindness or spiritual flaws such as compromised ethical discipline.

Don’t ponder others’ flaws.

Whenever you see faults in sentient beings in general or especially in those who have entered
the door of the Dharma, attribute this to your own impure perception. Think that there is
no certainty[11] that the person has such a flaw and put an end to your critical patterns
of thought.

Train first with the strongest destructive emotions.

Check to see which is the strongest destructive emotion in your mind and, combining all practices
into an antidote to that emotion, address it first.

Abandon any expectations of results.

Let go of all selfish concerns, such as seeking to gain wealth and respect in this life, happiness
in future lives as a god or human being, or gaining nirvāṇa for oneself, as a result
of practising mind training.

Give up poisonous food.

Abandon all virtuous activity that is contaminated by clinging to things as real or thoughts
of self-cherishing, just as you would avoid food that is laced with poison.

Don’t be so loyal to the cause.

Avoid holding grudges based on the harm others do to you and refusing to let go of resentment.

Don’t lash out in retaliation.

When others speak ill of you, do not respond with harsh words intended to hurt. And do not label
misfortune as a just reward.

Don’t lie in ambush.

Do not dwell on the harm others do to you while waiting for an opportunity to retaliate.

Don’t strike a vulnerable point.

Do not act in a way that causes pain to the minds of others, such as by exposing people's hidden
faults or reciting the "life-force mantras" of non-human beings.

Don’t transfer the ox’s burden to the cow.

Avoid the negative behaviour of deviously transferring to others any responsibility or blame
that is rightly yours.

Don’t be competitive.

Avoid any thoughts and actions focused on acquiring through various means possessions that are
held in common.

Don’t misperform the rites.

To take on others' defeat out of a wish for one's own ultimate happiness or to train the mind
in order to pacify demons, harmful influences and sickness is just like practising a mundane
rite in order to avert misfortune. We must avoid such selfish concerns. Mind training
that involves a partial attitude and which is understood as a beneficial method for dealing
with demons and harmful influences is no different from shamanic ritual. To qualify as
Dharma it must function as an antidote to mental afflictions and ordinary thoughts.

Don’t reduce gods to demons.

Worldly people, when their own gods are displeased and cause them harm, say that the god has
been reduced to a demon. Like that, if the practice of mind training leads to an increase
in pride and arrogance, the Dharma has become non-Dharma. Mind training must discipline one's
character. If one's character only becomes puffed up with pride, the Dharma has failed
to hit home. This is like performing a ransom ritual at the western door when a demon is
causing trouble at the eastern door. The medicine needs to be applied directly to the site
of the illness. Let us abandon self-cherishing and act as the most humble servant to all.

Don’t seek others’ misery as crutches of your own happiness.

Avoid wishing that others suffer as a means to your own happiness. Do not think, for example,
"If my close relative or friend were to die, I would get their food, wealth, books and so
on," "If my patron were to fall sick and die, I would have the chance to accumulate merit,"
"If my meditator colleague were to die, I would have the chance to accumulate merit by
myself," and "If my enemy were to die, I would no longer be harmed and would have the chance
to thrive."

7. The Precepts of Mind Training

We must train in methods that ensure mind training does not diminish but strengthens and improves.
The root text says:

Do everything with a single intention.

Carry out all activities, such the yogas of eating and dressing, purely with the intention of
benefitting others.

Counter all adversity with a single remedy.

If through practising mind training we experience illness, fall prey to demons and harmful influences,
become subject to slander or find that our mental afflictions increase, so that
we no longer wish to train the mind we can consider how many people in the world experience
similar difficulties. As we feel compassion for them, we can aspire to take all their problems
on ourselves and meditate on giving and taking (tonglen).

Two tasks: one at the beginning and one at the end.

In the morning create the right impetus by thinking, "Today I shall not part from twofold bodhicitta!"
Then maintain mindfulness and awareness accordingly during the day. In the evening
when preparing to sleep review the day's activities. If you acted in a way that is contrary
to bodhicitta, spell out your faults, confess, and resolve not to repeat the faults
in future. If your actions were in accord with bodhicitta, rejoice and aspire to continue
in a similar vein.

Whichever of the two occurs, be patient.

Should you accumulate followers and a wealth of possessions, do not let them become a cause
of arrogance. Instead recognize their illusoriness, and aspire that they become a means of
benefitting others. Should you become so destitute that you are (as the saying goes) lower
than everything but water, recognize that this too is illusory. Take all the hardships of
others upon yourself and do not be discouraged.

Keep the two, even at your life’s expense.

Unless you keep the commitments of the Dharma in general and mind training in particular you
will not experience happiness in this or future lives. So guard them more dearly than your
own life.

Train in the three difficulties.

When mental afflictions arise, it is difficult to notice them in the beginning, difficult to
avert them in the middle and difficult to interrupt their continuity in the end. Recognize
them, therefore, when they first arise; strengthen the antidote so as to abandon them in
the middle; and make every effort to ensure that they do not arise again at the end.

Acquire the three main provisions.

The most important provisions for Dharma practice are meeting a good teacher, practising authentically
with a workable mind, and gathering the conditions conducive to Dharma practice.
When these three are complete, rejoice and make the aspiration that others may similarly
gain all three. Should the three be incomplete, consider that many others in the world also
lack these prerequisites and are unable to practise Dharma authentically as a result. Feel
compassion for them. Cultivate the heartfelt aspiration that their lack of these provisions
may ripen on you and that they may come to possess them all.

Cultivate the three that must not decline.

Since all the qualities of the great vehicle depend on devotion to the guru, this devotion must
not decline. Mind training is the quintessence of Mahāyāna Dharma, so enthusiasm for its
practice must not decline. And maintenance of the precepts of the greater and lesser vehicles,
from the minor ones onward, must not decline.

Keep the three inseparable.

Ensure that your body, speech and mind never deviate from virtue.

Apply the training impartially to all.
It is vital that it be deep and all-pervasive.

Mind training must be applied to all sentient beings and insentient objects equally and without
partiality. You must apply the techniques to everything that arises in the mind. This
should not be mere lip service but deep competence.

Meditate constantly on those who’ve been set apart.

There are some for whom we find it difficult to feel love and compassion, and they should be
the special focus of meditation: rivals, regular companions, those who harm us without provocation,
and those us dislike for karmic reasons.

Don’t be dependent on external conditions.

Do not rely on gathering all the right conditions, such as food and clothing, protection against
human and non-human forces, good health and so on. If you cannot gather these conditions
integrate that very situation onto the path by means of the two types of bodhicitta.

This time, practise what’s most important.

All the physical forms we have adopted throughout beginningless time have been to no avail.
Now, in this lifetime we must accomplish what is most important. More important than the affairs
of this life is the Dharma. More important than Dharma study and teaching is practice.
More important than other forms of practice is training in bodhicitta. More important
than training through scripture and reasoning is assiduous practice based on the guru's instructions.
More important than other forms of conduct is remaining on one's seat and practising.
More important than avoiding objects is to apply the antidote. These are the most
important things to put into practice.

Don’t misunderstand.

There are six forms of misunderstanding to be avoided:

Misplaced patience is to bear any difficulties related to outdoing one's enemies and protecting
one's friends but not the sufferings related to Dharma practice.Misplaced intention is
to feel no interest in pure Dharma practice but to take an interest in the glories and riches
of this life.Misplaced relish is to fail to savour the taste of the Dharma through study,
reflection and meditation but to savour the taste of worldly pleasures.Misplaced compassion
is to fail to cultivate compassion for wrongdoers but to cultivate it for those who
endure hardship for the sake of the Dharma.Misplaced pursuit is to fail to encourage one's
dependents to pursue the Dharma but to encourage them to pursue the means of increasing
the glories and riches of this life.Misplaced joy is to fail to cultivate joy for the happiness
and virtues of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa but to rejoice when rivals suffer.

Avoid these six mistaken forms of practice and take to heart the six unmistaken forms.

Don’t be inconsistent.

Avoid the kind of sporadic practice that can occur when one does not yet have confidence in
the Dharma. Train your mind single-pointedly and without interruption.

Train wholeheartedly.

Devote yourself entirely to the mind training and practise emphatically.

Gain freedom through discernment and analysis.

Determine which of your mental afflictions is the strongest and make that the focus of intensive
effort. Investigate whether or not that affliction arises whenever you come into contact
with a potentially provocative object. If it does arise, apply an antidote to overcome
it, and make every effort until it no longer arises.

Don’t be boastful.

Do not boast about how kind you are to others, how long you have strenuously practised the Dharma,
or how learned and disciplined you are. There can be no boasting when you meditate
on cherishing others more than yourself. As Radrengpa put it, "Don't have high hopes for human
beings; supplicate the deities instead."

Don’t be irritable.

Do not retaliate even if others humiliate you in front of many people and do not be annoyed.
If we practitioners do not make the Dharma an antidote to self-grasping our patience can
become more fragile than a baby's skin and we can feel even more irritable than the demon
Tsang Tsen. This does not qualify as Dharma, so ensure that Dharma functions properly as an
antidote to self-grasping.

Don’t be temperamental.

Do not change your expression from cheery to depressed at the slightest provocation, because
this will only upset your companions.

Don’t seek acknowledgement.

Do not expect words of thanks or fame and renown for benefitting others or practising the Dharma.

Train well like this throughout your entire life, cultivating twofold bodhicitta in meditation
sessions and the periods in between. Then you will gain the confidence of mastery.

Conclusion

The essence of the nectar-like instructionsfor transforming into the path of awakeningthe five
prevalent signs of degenerationwas passed down from the one from Golden Isle.

At this time when the five signs of degeneration—in time, beings, lifespan, mental afflictions,
and view—are widespread, there are few circumstances conducive to happiness and many that
provoke suffering, including harm from humans and non-humans. Being entangled in negative
circumstances such as these can become a support for mind training. Then, no matter how
many negative circumstances one might face, the practice of mind training will ensure that
virtue only increases.

This pithy advice from the teacher of Suvarnadvīpa is like a nectar that turns poison into medicine.
It is superior to any other instruction. With knowledge of how to train the mind
in this way, the body of the mind training practitioner becomes 'the city that is the source
of happiness', because it brings about all one's own and others' joys in saṃsāra and nirvāṇa.
By applying this to all undertakings and training the mind well, your mind will merge
with the Dharma, and it will not be long before you attain the perfect goal for both yourself
and others.

The root text says:

When karmic seeds left over from former trainings were aroused in me,I felt great interest,
and so, without regard for suffering or disparagement,I sought instructions on subduing ego-clinging.Now,
even in death, I shall have no regrets.

Chekawa, the lord of yogis, says that he trained his mind thoroughly and, in his wisdom, came
to cherish others more than himself. He freed himself entirely from the thicket of selfish
concern and thereby gained this level of confidence.

Through the kindness of the Dharma Lord by the name of Drakpa,I well received the precious treasury
of this oral transmission,Through the power of this revelation requested by faithful
disciples,May all beings come to master the two types of bodhicitta!

This succinct commentary based on the words of the aural lineage of Seven Points of Mind Training
was composed in response to repeated requests from Drakpa Gyaltsen, a yogi of the supreme
vehicle, by the monk Tokme in his retreat place, the dharma fortress of Ngulchu.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2018.

Version: 1.2-20220216

Ratnāvalī II, 74–75  ↩Bodhicaryāvatāra VIII, 120  ↩Bodhicaryāvatāra VIII, 131  ↩Bodhicaryāvatāra
VIII, 136  ↩Bodhicaryāvatāra VIII, 134  ↩Bodhicaryāvatāra VIII, 155  ↩Bodhicaryāvatāra
VIII, 154  ↩Bodhicaryāvatāra VIII, 169  ↩'gong po 'gong rdzong gi chos.  ↩Bodhicaryāvatāra
VI, 113  ↩nyen med. The translation here is tentative.  ↩